# PROGRESS CHECK-IN 2: 11/22/2024 


## 1) Addressing prior feedback 

From the peer review, a lot of the feedback was regarding the lack of an actual code file and we made sure to submit that for our second progress check in. 

Additionally, I included direct snippets of feedback that was provided to us by our cohort and have incorporated them to improve our work: 

Colina brought up some good points, such as: 

1. How do you plan to incorporate clinical metadata such as age, sex, or treatment type into your analysis to increase the translational relevance of findings?

2. Do you plan to compare your findings with previously reported polymerase-specific studies in individual cancers to validate your results?

3. Would you consider doing dimensionality reduction beyond UMAP, such as t-SNE or PCA, for cross-validation?


To her first feedback, we realized that we were completely disregarding important metrics like age or sex. We ran a UMAP on both variables and saw some interesting results (the age range of 30-39 had the highest expression - probably due to also incident report but something we should dig more into). We did try PCA and t-sNE, but found that UMAP provided the most robust findings that could really integrate the high throughput of this data. Based on our results, it seems that the polymerase D family has a critical role and as Colina mentioned, we will do a literature search to validate this. 


Both Derek and Daniel commented that listing the full names of the cancer conditions being investigated would be helpful and to provide better labeled figures. In regards to their first point, we included a table of the cancers (abbreviations and full name) we are studying. Additionally, for the final presentation, we will make sure to annotate the figures so that they are more understandbale. 


## 2) New progress updates 

As mentioned before, we adjusted the trajectory of our focus and analyzed the data for 20 polymerase families to perform a comprehsneive unbiased analysis on the relationship between polymerase malfunction and cancer. 

Here is a list of the 20 polymerases with its respective full name/function: 

    1. "POLA1" = DNA polymerase alpha catalytic subunit
    2. "POLA2" = DNA polymerase alpha accessory subunit
    3. "POLD1" = DNA polymerase delta catalytic subunit
    4. "POLD2" = DNA polymerase delta accessory subunit
    5. "POLD3" = DNA polymerase delta subunit 3
    6. "POLD4" = DNA polymerase delta subunit 4
    7. "POLE" = DNA polymerase epsilon catalytic subunit
    8. "POLE2" = DNA polymerase epsilon subunit 2
    9. "POLE3" = DNA polymerase epsilon subunit 3
    10. "POLE4" = DNA polymerase epsilon subunit 4
    11. "POLB" = DNA polymerase beta (base excision repair)
    12. "POLG" = DNA polymerase gamma catalytic subunit (mitochondrial)
    13. "POLG2" = DNA polymerase gamma accessory subunit (mitochondrial)
    14. "POLZ" = DNA polymerase zeta catalytic subunit (REV3L)
    15. "REV1" = DNA polymerase involved in translesion synthesis
    16. "POLM" = DNA polymerase mu (non-homologous end joining)
    17. "POLL" = DNA polymerase lambda (base excision repair and non-homologous end joining)
    18. "POLH" = DNA polymerase eta (translesion synthesis)
    19. "POLI" = DNA polymerase iota (translesion synthesis)
    20. "POLK" = DNA polymerase kappa (translesion synthesis)


We have submitted a jupyter notebook file that includes the python script for our analysis using the scRNA-sequencing data. The file is quite large because we included most of our script there and to view for now, it has to be downloaded. We will work on annotating and separating out the code to chunks. 

We dug deeper into the single-cell data analysis and re-ran UMAP based on age, sex, treatment, cell type, and cancer type. 

Additionally, for the bulk RNA-seq data, we did pathway correlation analysis and tried to see how different polymerase families either activated or inhibited common cancer pathways (such as apoptosis, RTK, etc). We tried to dig a bit deeper into the CNV results and based it upon methylation and mRNA expression as well. 

Tying these results together, in general we can conclude that the polymerase D family seems to play a critical role in cancer presennce and progression. 

## 3) Project organization 

As mentioned previously, we will adjust our project explanation README.md to reflect the direction change we made: we will be examining all polymerase gene families rather than focusing solely on polymerase alpha. 

For now, we are thinking of keeping the project organization as is with the 2 sources of data single and bulk RNA-sequencing. Data download, batch-effect correction, lowly expressed gene filtering, and overall pre-processing steps were taken in python for single-cell and R for bulk-RNA. 

Based on the current analysis we have performed, there may be a possibity that we remove the bulk-RNA sequencing data and focus more on the single-cell data we have. Because of the high density of information there is, we feel that doing a deeper analysis on just one rather than combining the two would be the move. This will be decided within the following week and changes will be reflected onto the github repository ASAP. 

## 4) Struggles and questions 

Similar to what we stated for our first progress check in, we are a bit stuck on piecing the story together and not making it as dense in terms of what to show vs not show for our final presentation. Since we are trying to perform a comprehensive analysis that combines both single and bulk-RNA sequencing data, finding a conclusion that unbiasedly ties both together is proving to be a bit difficult. To check and expand on the idea that the polymerase D family has an important role, we will try running some side-analysis to confirm. 
