# PROGRESS CHECK-IN 1: 11/1/2024 

## 1) Addressing prior feedback 

Some prior feedback we received with our initial project submisstion is: 

1. For differential gene expression, what conditions are you comparing? 

    For differential gene expression, we are comparing the different types of cancer for our conditions. 

2. What types of graphs are you generating to summarize these comparisons?

    We will be generating volcano plots and heatmaps for now. We are trying to think of more types of figures to add that will be better at displaying the processed data from TCGA. 

3. Also what libraries will you use for GO analysis? 

    We will be using topGO to perform GO-term analysis on all 3 root categories (BP: Biological Process, CC: Cellular Component, and MF: Molecular Function). 

4. Are these included in the python libraries already stated?

    Downstream analysis will be done in R using the packages stated above in question 3. 

## 2) New progress updates 

We changed the trajectory of our project and adjusted it from focusing only on polymerase alpha to analyzing 20 polymerase families to perform a more comprehensive analysis on the relationship between polymerase malfunction and cancer. 

Here is a list of the 20 polymerases we will be analyzing: 

    1. polI
    2. polL
    3. polK
    4. polE3
    5. polA1
    6. polE2
    7. polG
    8. polD3
    9. polA2
    10. polD4
    11. polD1
    12. PRIM2
    13. polE
    14. REV1
    15. polH
    16. polE4
    17. polG2
    18. PRIM1
    19. polD2
    20. polM

We have also submitted 5 figures with our check-in in the directory folder for check-in 1. 

A brief explanation and summary for each can be found below:

Figures 1 to 4 are from bulk-RNA sequencing data and figure 5 is from single cell RNA-sequencing data. 

Figure 1: CNV Percentage to present a heatmap-style visualization showing the percentage of copy number variations (CNVs) across various cancers for the different DNA polymerase genes. Red and green indicate gain and loss in CNVs respectively, while gray represents no change. This allows for a quick comparison of CNV trends across cancer types and polymerases, helping identify any patterns in polymerase gene amplification or deletion across cancer types.

Figure 2: Survival score comparison of the various cancer types where hazard ratio = gene expression survival, OS = overall survival, PFS = progression free survival, DSS = disease specific survival, and DFI = disease free interval for each polymerase family. We found that it would be overhwelming and too overwhelming to present and decided to perform deconvolution analysis as another processing step to address this issue. 

Figure 3: Same figure as above, but results after running deconvolution analysis 

Figure 4: Heatmap illustrating the cancer related pathways and correlation to the different cancer types calculated using Spearman's correlation. 

Figure 5: Heatmap illustrating the different immune cell types and its correlation to the different cancer types also calculated using Spearman's correlation. 

Figure 6: UMAPs of the overall cancer types being analyzed and expression of ech polymerase family within the cancer types. 

## 3) Project organization 

We will adjust our project explanation README.md file to reflect these new directions we are taking with our project. 

We will keep our project organization as is with 2 sources of raw data: single and bulk RNA-sequencing. Data download, batch-effect correction, lowly expressed gene filtering, and overall pre-processing steps were taken in python for single-cell and R for bulk-RNA. 

Downstream analysis has been and will continue to be performed on both in R. We will combine overlapping data for further analysis later one. 

## 4) Struggles and questions 

Because we are trying to do a quite  comprehensive analysis on studying most major polymerase families, one struggle we have is creating an unbiased analysis that integrates all of our results from both single-cell and bulk-RNA sequencing results for a clear storyline. 